Let's take a closer look at how DIMSE services are set up.
So first, a quick reminder,
the stack that you see here might seem familiar.
This is called the OSI model,
the open systems interconnection model.
It's a model that characterizes
communication functions and define several levels of a networking stack.
So at the bottom of the OSI model,
you have a physical layer,
and then as we go up,
you have a higher and higher abstraction layers
from the underlying physical networking protocol.
At the top of the OSI layer,
we have the presentation layer and we have the application layer.
DICOM DIMSE services, they operate at the bottom two portions of the OSI stack.
For example, an HTTP protocol that basically runs the web,
this is how the websites and web services communicate,
it occupies the very top level,
the application layer of the OSI model.
So DICOM DIMSE services,
they are a bit more involved and they define a bit more things than HTTP protocol.
In DICOM DIMSE networking,
we have application entities.
Application entities talk to each other and application entities may perform two roles.
An application entity, it may be a service class user.
It means that it will be asking for something or it will be performing requests,
or an application entity could be a service class provider.
Service class provider would be serving requests or it would
be send an indication to service class user.
Such requests could be like these things that we see in the table on the right here.
So a service class user might issue a C-STORE request,
which basically would be asking a service class provider to store some images.
A service class provider for example,
might issue a C-MOVE request which would be asking
a service class user to move images from one place to another.
Let's take a look at how application entities are defined on the networks.
An application entity basically has
several attributes that uniquely identify it on the network.
Application entity has an application entity title,
which is an alphanumeric string,
it has a port, and it has an IP endpoint.
So basically, it's a web service which is listening on a specific port,
but on top of that, in DICOM speak,
you need to have this application entity title to identify you,
which means you can have several application entities listening on the same port,
on the same IP address.
This image is a screenshot from Slicer, for example,
which shows how in Slicer you can configure
different networking endpoints that the Slicer can communicate with.
It looks very similar to
DICOM networking communication configuration windows
and many other clinical imaging software.
You can see that in order to send images from Slicer in this case,
to other DICOM application entities on the network,
you need to specify the application entity title, the port,
and the IP address, and then you will be able to
issue requests to those application entities.
So what request could be sent over the network?
Let's take a closer look at them.
One type of popular request,
and this would be the first thing that you would do if
you are debugging a DICOM networking,
would be a C-ECHO request.
C-ECHO request is basically a DICOM ping.
So this is a way for a service class user to issue
a very simple message to a service class provider and basically ask it, "Are you there?"
Because you can send
the standard TCP ICMP ping to a networking endpoint and you might get a response,
but there might not be a DICOM aware entity listening on the other end.
So if you have a network connection but the images are not going through,
the next thing to try would be send a C-ECHO request with one of
the tools or this could be a functionality which
is embedded into your clinical imaging tool,
and see if there's anyone listening to DICOM requests on the other end.
Another important DIMSE service is called C-STORE,
which we had mentioned briefly in this lesson.
C-STORE is basically a request from a service class user
to a service class provider to store a DICOM instance.
Remember in DICOM speak,
DICOM instance is a single image basically.
So C-STORE sends over DICOM instance and service class provider
responds to that by saying that request is acknowledged.
There are more services out there in DIMSE networking,
there is a C-FIND service which basically returns
a list of UIDs that conform to a certain query.
There is a C-GET service which sets up a set of
C-STORE services from service class provider to a service class user.
There is a C-MOVE service which is used to move images from one location to another.
As you integrate your AI algorithm into the system,
you need to be aware that these things exist.
It's unlikely you need to know the details of how they
operate and in order to debug the systems,
most likely C-STORE will be enough to make sure that you can send images over DICOM,
but it is helpful to understand that these things exist.
Also, a few important things to keep in mind.
So first, application entity can change its role depending on what it is doing.
It can be a service class user and send the C-STORE request,
and then it can become a service class provider when a C-STORE request comes in.
Another thing to note about the DIMSE services,
as you might have noticed,
there is no notion of series level or studies level transfers.
Basically, you send instances over DICOM networks.
So C-STORE request defines a store requests for
a collection of instances and if you are listening,
you don't really have a way to know how many of those are coming in
and you don't have a way to know if there are more coming.
So there are some workarounds that people have come up with and you need to be
aware that if you are relying on receiving the DICOM objects over C-STORE,
you need to be aware that you need to
track how many of these instances you have received,
and you need to probably have some way to understand that this series is complete.
Sometimes people read DICOM text for that,
sometimes people just have some timeouts and there are different techniques for that.
Another interesting thing that you need to be aware of when you're
working with DIMSE services is that there is no authentication basically,
nowhere in this little bit of introduction into
DIMSE services have I spoken about authentication and there is none.
The reason for that is the DIMSE services have
been first invented before HTTP was even invented and
they were invented for the sole purpose of
communicating over local area network where everybody trusts everybody.
DIMSE services are still used in the clinic in a trusted environment for modalities,
for example, to communicate to clinical imaging archives.
So you need to keep in mind,
then on clinical networks when people use DIMSE services to communicate,
anyone can send anything to anyone;
and basically looking up application entity titles is the only way to check
whether what you're receiving is intended to be sent to you or to someone else.
So that's it for DICOM DIMSE services,
let's talk a little bit about DICOM web.
As we have seen, DICOM DIMSE services have been designed to operate in
trusted local area networks without
authentication and with many other shortcuts and optimizations.
DICOM web is a more recent development in the DICOM standard,
it has been designed in web 2.0 era,
and it has been designed at a set of APIs,
set of services that a DICOM application entity can provide over internet to its clients.
DICOM web basically designs same services;
it designs a find service,
it designs a retrieve service,
it designs certain services that have to do with clinical workflows.
DICOM web is a RESTful service which has been designed to communicate over Internet.
DICOM web seems to be more advanced thing than DICOM DIMSE services,
but a lot of DICOM modalities,
DICOM application entities in the clinic,
still DIMSE services which have been designed to communicate over land.
It is important to be aware of both as you think
about integrating your AI models in a clinical environment.
So next up, let's look about reasonable integration points for your AI algorithms.